“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good . . .
and act with faithfulness”
—Psalm 37:3.
The Watchtower  study article
that introduced this
as the yeartext for 2017
opened up a beautiful and practical way
of thinking about
how to manage problems in life:
Recognize what you cannot do,
and trust in Jehovah.
Recognize what you can do, and do that.
Now, the article gave us
a number of examples of people
who did that in a variety of circumstances.
Noah recognized
that he could not force wicked people
to accept his message.
He had no control over
when the Flood would come,
but he could faithfully proclaim
the warning message,
and he could build the ark.
So he focused on doing those things,
trusting in Jehovah for the rest.
King David after sinning seriously
recognized that he couldn’t undo
what he had done.
Neither could he escape
the consequences for what he had done.
But he could avail himself
of Jehovah’s arrangements,
accept correction, and move forward.
And as we take ourselves
through that exercise,
we can apply that way of thinking
to any number of situations
that we face in life.
Recognize what you cannot do,
and trust in Jehovah.
Recognize what you can do,
and do that.
And also think about Bible examples of people
who were in a situation
that you can identify with.
For instance, say you have
an enormously difficult task to accomplish
in a very short period of time.
Can you think of someone in the Bible
who faced a similar situation?
Many possibilities come to mind.
But let’s focus on 2 Chronicles chapter 14
and the account of Asa.
Second Chronicles 14:9 says:
“Later Zerah the Ethiopian came against them
“with an army of 1,000,000 men
and 300 chariots.”
How big was Asa’s army?
Verse 8 says
580,000 men with hand weapons.
So Zerah’s army was almost twice as large
and far better equipped.
What would Asa do?
Verse 11:
“Asa then called to Jehovah his God and said:
“‘O Jehovah, it does not matter to you
“‘whether those you help
are many or have no power.
“‘Help us, O Jehovah our God,
“‘for we are relying on you,
“‘and in your name
we have come against this crowd.
“‘O Jehovah, you are our God.
Do not let mortal man prevail against you.’”
Now, Asa knew
that he could not turn
Zerah away in his own power.
He knew he could not fight
a million-man army with 300 chariots and win.
So he left the impossible to Jehovah.
But what could Asa do?
Notice verses 12-14,
and as you read this,
notice what Jehovah gets the credit for
and what Asa gets the credit for.
“So Jehovah defeated the Ethiopians
“before Asa and before Judah,
“and the Ethiopians fled.
“Asa and the people with him
“pursued them as far as Gerar,
and the Ethiopians continued falling.”
And Asa continued gathering much spoil,
much of which he later sacrificed to Jehovah.
So when faced with an impossible task,
Asa recognized what he could not do
and trusted in Jehovah,
but he also recognized what he could do,
and he did that.
Now, did Jehovah actually need
Asa’s military force?
More on that in a minute.
But first, how can we apply Psalm 37:3 today?
Are you facing a difficult work assignment?
a challenging personality?
a dynamic health crisis?
a financial shortfall?
No doubt this Psalm 37:3 process
can help you to think productively.
Because of an accident,
a brother in the Midwest
lost a well-paying job
that he held for 14 years.
Now his family had no income.
They supplicated Jehovah.
They trusted in Jehovah first and foremost,
but was there anything
that they could actually do
in conjunction with that?
Yes.
They cut down on their expenses.
They gleaned in nearby fields.
They fished for their food.
With help from the congregation
and taking some part-time work
when it became available,
this family of four managed.
A year after the accident, the mother said:
“We can fool ourselves into thinking
“that we are relying upon Jehovah
“when we are really relying upon
“our own abilities, our mate, or our job.
“We, though, really learned to trust just Him
“[that is, Jehovah].
“These other things can be taken away,
“but Jehovah never left us
—not for one moment.
“Though we have just the bare necessities,
our relationship with Jehovah as a family
is much closer.”
Candid observation.
“Trust in Jehovah and do what is good.”
It seems like a simple equation,
but how easy it could be
to mistake the “do what is good” part
for trusting in our own abilities!
What happened to Asa
more than a decade after his smashing victory
over the million Ethiopians?
At 2 Chronicles 16:1-3,
he faces another confrontation:
“In the 36th year of the reign of Asa,
“King Baasha of Israel came up against Judah
and began to build up Ramah
to prevent anyone from going out
or coming in to King Asa of Judah.”
What would Asa do in this case?
“At that Asa brought out silver and gold
“from the treasuries of Jehovah’s house
“[so he’s spending Jehovah’s money;
“surely, he consulted God about that]
“and the king’s house
“and sent them to King Ben-hadad of Syria,
“who was dwelling in Damascus, saying:
“‘There is a treaty between me and you
“‘and between my father and your father.
“‘I am sending you silver and gold.
“‘Come, break your treaty
with King Baasha of Israel,
so that he will withdraw from me.’”
What was Asa thinking?
Did he consider Baasha not much of a threat?
Was he thinking he was smart enough
to outmaneuver him?
Did his strategy work?
Reading through verses 4-6,
it might at first appear
that his plan was successful.
But what was the problem?
Hanani explains in verses 7-9:
“At that time Hanani the seer
came to King Asa of Judah and said to him:
“‘Because you relied
“‘on the king of Syria
“‘and did not rely on Jehovah your God,
“‘the army of the king of Syria
has escaped out of your hand.
“‘Were not the Ethiopians and the Libyans
“‘a very great army
with many chariots and horsemen?
“‘But because you relied on Jehovah,
“‘he gave them into your hand.
“‘For the eyes of Jehovah are roving about
“‘through all the earth
to show his strength in behalf of those
“‘whose heart is complete toward him.
“‘You have acted foolishly in this matter;
from now on there will be wars against you.’”
What can we learn from this account?
Remember Jehovah.
Remember what Jehovah
has done for you in the past;
continue to rely on him today.
Doing what is good is really an act of faith.
It’s evidence of participation,
of our desire to receive Jehovah’s blessing.
But we don’t outgrow trusting in Jehovah.
Jehovah is looking for opportunities
“to show his strength in behalf
of those whose heart is complete toward him.”
And that brings us
to the account of Asa’s son, Jehoshaphat.
Jehoshaphat doubled Asa’s army
to exceed a million,
yet he found himself terrified
by the onslaught of Moab and Ammon
in the mountainous region of Seir.
What did he do?
He trusted in Jehovah.
What good could he do?
Fighting in that instance
would have been an act of disobedience
because Jehovah told them simply to go out,
stand still, and don’t be afraid.
So they sang.
Doing what is good
is a reflection of our faith
and our desire for Jehovah’s blessing.
And when that is the motive,
it results in a resounding victory.
Let’s go out
and have a resounding victory today.